Adding in remote functions NLP (#329)
GoogleCloudPlatform/bigquery-utils: udfs/remote_udfs/nlp/README.md

* [BigQuery API](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs)
* [Cloud Functions API](https://cloud.google.com/functions/docs)
* [BigQuery Connections API](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/working-with-connections#enable_the_connection_service)
* [Natural Language API](https://cloud.google.com/natural-language/docs/setup#api)

## Running the example

### Creating your BigQuery connection 

To create your BigQuery connection, you need to specify the following:
* project_id - the project id that you wish to create the connection in
* location - the location for the external connection in BigQuery
* connection_name - the name of the connection 
* display_name - (optional) the name (friendly name) you want to show 

```
bq mk --connection --display_name=\'$DISPLAY_NAME\' --connection_type=CLOUD_RESOURCE \
      --project_id=$PROJECT --location=$LOCATION $CONNECTION_NAME
```

### Getting the service account associated with the connection

You need to grant the connection service account to be able to invoke functions.  
To do this, first obtain the service account. 
* location - the location for the external connection in BigQuery

```

> bq ls --connection --location=$LOCATION

Reviewer: bq show --connection --project_id=$PROJECT --location=$LOCATION $CONNECTION_NAME

```

Within properties you'll find *serviceAccountId* which will have the service ID you'll need in a subsequent step.

### Granting the service account invoker permissions on the functions

Grant the service account obtained above permissions to invoke the functions.
* project - the project where your external connection was created
* service_account - the service account obtained above
```
gcloud projects add-iam-policy-binding $PROJECT \

>     --member=serviceAccount:$SERVICE_ACCOUNT --role=roles/cloudfunctions.invoker

Reviewer: This will grant permission for the service account on project level. Probably better to grant the permission on the function level

gcloud --project=$PROJECT functions add-iam-policy-binding $CF_NAME --member=serviceAccount:$SERVICE_ACCOUNT --role=roles/cloudfunctions.invoker

To do that, probably need to move the deploying your Cloud Function section before Creating your BigQuery connection?

Author: I'll update the call to be function level - but I think it has to come after right? we need the service account from the connection

Author: (I moved it to after I created the function if that's what you meant)

Author: Updated and pushed

# Calling Google's Natural Language API Sentiment Analysis Example 

Google's Natural Language API Sentiment Analysis inspects the given text and identifies the prevailing emotional opinion within the text, especially to determine a writer's attitude as positive, negative, or neutral.  

To run this example, you will need the following APIs enabled:
* [BigQuery API](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs)
* [Cloud Functions API](https://cloud.google.com/functions/docs)
* [BigQuery Connections API](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/working-with-connections#enable_the_connection_service)
* [Natural Language API](https://cloud.google.com/natural-language/docs/setup#api)

> ## Running the example

Reviewer 2: First step should be for user to change into this directory within their shell

Author: added

      --project_id=$PROJECT --location=$LOCATION $CONNECTION_NAME
```

### Getting the service account associated with the connection

You need to grant the connection service account to be able to invoke functions.  
To do this, first obtain the service account. 
* location - the location for the external connection in BigQuery
* project - the project where your external connection was created
* connection_name - the name (or friendly/display name) of the external connection

```
bq ls --connection --location=$LOCATION
bq show --connection --project_id=$PROJECT --location=$LOCATION $CONNECTION_NAME
```

Within properties you'll find *serviceAccountId* which will have the service ID you'll need in a subsequent step.

### Deploying your Cloud Function

[More information about deploying your cloud function can be found here.](https://cloud.google.com/functions/docs/deploy)

Snippet provided below for brevity.
* cf_name - the name of the cloud function, this should match the entry function in your code (in the example it's *remote_vertex_ai*)
* project - the project the cloud function is deployed to 
* runtime - this was defaulted to python39 but can be changed as required 
```

> gcloud functions deploy $CF_NAME \

Reviewer 2: This is all under the "Running the example" section.
Make it easy for a user to run the example as-is, so set the values for things like CF_NAME

Reviewer 2: Also, CF_NAME and the function entry do not have to be the same, and if anything it's confusing to recommend it because users may deploy several functions from the same source with different entries. 

Instead add [--entry-point option](https://cloud.google.com/sdk/gcloud/reference/functions/deploy#--entry-point)

Author: The only thing I can't do is the service account since it's created after the fact - (I can script it out) let me know what your thoughts are.

Reviewer 2: `gcloud functions describe remote_vertex_ai --format="value(httpsTrigger.url)"`

Author: Yeah, I can script it out, sorry that's what I meant, then I'll do that

Reviewer 2: for the bq tool, you'll have to use jq to parse out the serviceAccount as follows:

`bq show --connection --project_id=$PROJECT --location=$LOCATION $CONNECTION_NAME | jq '.cloudResource.serviceAccountId'`

Author: updated

> gcloud functions deploy $CF_NAME \

Reviewer 2: Missing parameter:  `--source call_nlp`

Author: Thanks, added

> gcloud functions deploy $CF_NAME \

Reviewer 2: Ideally, you should structure this example to use only internal traffic via private IPs

> gcloud functions deploy $CF_NAME \

Reviewer 2: [Our docs recommend](https://cloud.google.com/functions/docs/concepts/version-comparison) deploying as gen2 cloud function so specify  `--gen2`

Reviewer: I am fine with gen1 for this demo. In case you want to use gen2, gen2 url is not deterministic so addition step is needed to get the url, and permission granting is also a little different.

Author: Given the Chao's recommendation - should we just leave it as gen1?

Reviewer 2: Yes but add a note that gen1 is only being used for simple demo purposes and gen2 should otherwise be used.

Author: Added

> gcloud functions deploy $CF_NAME \

Author: Added recommendation

Snippet provided below for brevity.  
It’s recommended that you keep the default authentication instead of allowing unauthenticated invocation of your Cloud Function or Cloud Run service.  
We use gen1 Cloud Functions here for the simple demo purposes; however, gen2 Cloud Functions are recommended. 
Run the following command to deploy your Cloud Function:
```
gcloud functions deploy analyze-sentiment \
--project=$PROJECT --runtime=python39 --entry-point=analyze_sentiment --region=$LOCATION --source=call_nlp --trigger-http
```

### Granting the service account invoker permissions on the functions

**_NOTE:_** For the below commands you will need to have jq installed. 
Run the following commands to grant the service account obtained above permissions to invoke your Cloud Function:

```
SERVICE_ACCOUNT=$(bq show --connection --project_id=$PROJECT --location=$LOCATION --format=json remote_connection | jq '.cloudResource.serviceAccountId' -r)
gcloud --project=$PROJECT functions add-iam-policy-binding analyze-sentiment --member=serviceAccount:$SERVICE_ACCOUNT --role=roles/cloudfunctions.invoker
```

### Creating your BigQuery UDF on BigQuery

> Run the following DDL statement to create your remote UDF in BigQuery:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Run the following DDL statements to create two  remote UDFs in BigQuery, one which analyzes sentiment of plain text and another which analyzes sentiment of html:
```

```
ENDPOINT=$(gcloud functions describe analyze-sentiment --format="value(httpsTrigger.url)")

> REMOTE_UDF_DDL="""
> CREATE OR REPLACE  FUNCTION \`${PROJECT}.${DATASET}.analyze_sentiment_plain_text\` (x STRING)
> RETURNS STRING
> REMOTE WITH CONNECTION \`${PROJECT}.${LOCATION}.remote_connection\`
> OPTIONS(
>   endpoint = '${ENDPOINT}',
>   user_defined_context = [(\"documentType\",\"PLAIN_TEXT\")]
> );
> """

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ANALYZE_PLAIN_TEXT_UDF_DDL="""
CREATE OR REPLACE  FUNCTION \`${PROJECT}.${DATASET}.analyze_sentiment_plain_text\` (x STRING)
RETURNS STRING
REMOTE WITH CONNECTION \`${PROJECT}.${LOCATION}.remote_connection\`
OPTIONS(
  endpoint = '${ENDPOINT}',
  user_defined_context = [(\"documentType\",\"PLAIN_TEXT\")]
);

ANALYZE_HTML_UDF_DDL="""
CREATE OR REPLACE  FUNCTION \`${PROJECT}.${DATASET}.analyze_sentiment_plain_text\` (x STRING)
RETURNS STRING
REMOTE WITH CONNECTION \`${PROJECT}.${LOCATION}.remote_connection\`
OPTIONS(
  endpoint = '${ENDPOINT}',
  user_defined_context = [(\"documentType\",\"HTML\")]
);
"""
```

> bq query \
>     --location="${LOCATION}" \
>     --use_legacy_sql=false \
>     "${REMOTE_UDF_DDL}"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
bq query \
    --location="${LOCATION}" \
    --use_legacy_sql=false \
    "${ANALYZE_PLAIN_TEXT_UDF_DDL}"
    
bq query \
    --location="${LOCATION}" \
    --use_legacy_sql=false \
    "${ANALYZE_HTML_UDF_DDL}"    
```

```

### Putting it all together

The [deploy.sh](/udfs/remote_udfs/nlp/deploy.sh) script combines all the previous setup steps into one simple script which you can execute via the following command: 
**_NOTE:_** When setting the LOCATION, use a regional endpoint (for example, us-central1) for the purpose of this demo, the location will be used for both the Cloud Function and the BigQuery parameters.

```
PROJECT=your_project_id
LOCATION=your_bigquery_dataset_location
DATASET=your_bigquery_dataset_id

sh deploy.sh "${PROJECT}" "${LOCATION}" "${DATASET}"
```

### Running it on BigQuery
You should now be able to run the remote UDF on BigQuery.

**_NOTE:_** If you get a permissions denied error, wait approximately 60 seconds, permissions may take up to 60 seconds to propagate. 

Try it in your BigQuery console. 
```

> select `%your_project_id%.%your_dataset_id%.analyze_sentiment_plain_text`("This is really awesome!");

Reviewer 2: Give examples of analyzing sentiment of both plain text and html

```
gcloud functions deploy analyze-sentiment \
--project=$PROJECT --runtime=python39 --entry-point=analyze_sentiment --source=call_nlp --trigger-http
```

### Granting the service account invoker permissions on the functions

Grant the service account obtained above permissions to invoke the functions.
* project - the project where your external connection was created
* cf_name - the name of your cloud function 
* service_account - the service account associated with the external connection

**_NOTE:_** For the below command you will need to have jq installed. 

You need to grant the connection service account to be able to invoke functions.  
To do this, first obtain the service account.  
Then apply the cloudfunctions.invoker role to the service account for the function. 

```
SERVICE_ACCOUNT=$(bq show --connection --project_id=$PROJECT --location=$LOCATION --format=json remote_connection | jq '.cloudResource.serviceAccountId' -r)
gcloud --project=$PROJECT functions add-iam-policy-binding analyze-sentiment --member=serviceAccount:$SERVICE_ACCOUNT --role=roles/cloudfunctions.invoker
```

### Creating your BigQuery UDF on BigQuery

> You can choose to do this many ways.  
> * [Creating your BigQuery function](/udfs/remote_udfs/nlp/create_bq_function.sh) 
> 
> The input parameters for the helper script above need to be in order:
> * project - the project you deployed to 
> * dataset - the BigQuery dataset you want to deploy to 
> * location - the location where your BigQuery dataset is
> * endpoint - the full endpoint of the cloud function invocation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Run the following DDL statement to create your remote UDF in BigQuery:
```

```
ENDPOINT=$(gcloud functions describe analyze-sentiment --format="value(httpsTrigger.url)")

> sh create_bq_function.sh $PROJECT $DATASET $LOCATION $PROJECT.$LOCATION.remote_connection $ENDPOINT

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NLP_QUERY="""
CREATE OR REPLACE  FUNCTION \`${PROJECT}.${DATASET}.analyze_sentiment_plain_text\` (x STRING)
RETURNS STRING
REMOTE WITH CONNECTION \`${PROJECT}.${LOCATION}.remote_connection\`
OPTIONS(
  endpoint = '${ENDPOINT}',
  user_defined_context = [(\"documentType\",\"PLAIN_TEXT\")]
);
"""

bq query \
    --location="${LOCATION}" \
    --use_legacy_sql=false \
    "${NLP_QUERY}"
```

# Calling Google's Natural Language API Sentiment Analysis Example 

Google's Natural Language API Sentiment Analysis inspects the given text and identifies the prevailing emotional opinion within the text, especially to determine a writer's attitude as positive, negative, or neutral.  

To run this example, you will need the following APIs enabled:
* [BigQuery API](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs)
* [Cloud Functions API](https://cloud.google.com/functions/docs)
* [BigQuery Connections API](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/working-with-connections#enable_the_connection_service)
* [Natural Language API](https://cloud.google.com/natural-language/docs/setup#api)

## Running the example

### Setting the environment variables 

Replace the various environment variables below with your desired values.
```
PROJECT=your_project_id

> LOCATION=your_bigquery_dataset_location

Reviewer: We are using the same location for BigQuery and CF. I would suggest to specify the location here e.g. us-east1. Otherwise user may use US for bigquery location, but not supported by CF.

Author: I added a comment when setting the variables to use specific regions (not multi region) for the purpose of the demo.

> DATASET=your_bigquery_dataaset_id

Reviewer: typo: your_bigquery_dataset_id

It seems that we assume it exists and it's in the location, instead should we include the dataset creation command in the location.

Author: Updated 

We do assume it exists, we already re-use the location, I think it's safe enough - since there are a few nuances (we need to make sure the dataset doesn't exist, check location etc.)

Reviewer: Probably call it out, followed a create dataset bq cmd just in case. In this example, the dataset is only used for hosting the remote function and there's limitation on location, so creating a new dataset seems more convenient for audience.

```

### Navigate to the remote_udfs directory
Change to the remote_udfs directory after cloning the repo. 
```
cd bigquery-utils/udfs/remote_udfs/nlp
```

### Creating your BigQuery connection 

To create your BigQuery connection, you need to specify the following:
* project_id - the project id that you wish to create the connection in
* location - the location for the external connection in BigQuery

```
bq mk --connection --display_name=\'remote_connection\' --connection_type=CLOUD_RESOURCE \
      --project_id=$PROJECT --location=$LOCATION remote_connection
```

### Deploying your Cloud Function

[More information about deploying your cloud function can be found here.](https://cloud.google.com/functions/docs/deploy)

Snippet provided below for brevity.  
It’s recommended that you keep the default authentication instead of allowing unauthenticated invocation of your Cloud Function or Cloud Run service.  
We use gen1 Cloud Functions here for the simple demo purposes; however, gen2 Cloud Functions are recommended.  

* project - the project the cloud function is deployed to 
* runtime - this was defaulted to python39 but can be changed as required 
```

> gcloud functions deploy analyze-sentiment \

Reviewer: Need to specify the location in the cmd right?

Author: Whoops good catch, I have a default set I think

added

To run this example, you will need the following APIs enabled:
* [BigQuery API](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs)
* [Cloud Functions API](https://cloud.google.com/functions/docs)
* [BigQuery Connections API](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/working-with-connections#enable_the_connection_service)
* [Natural Language API](https://cloud.google.com/natural-language/docs/setup#api)

## Running the example

### Setting the environment variables 

Replace the various environment variables below with your desired values.
```
PROJECT=%Your project name% 
LOCATION=%Your BigQuery dataset location% 
DATASET=%Your BigQuery Dataset to deploy to%
```

### Navigate to the remote_udfs directory
Change to the remote_udfs directory after cloning the repo. 
```
cd bigquery-utils/udfs/remote_udfs/ 
```

### Creating your BigQuery connection 

To create your BigQuery connection, you need to specify the following:
* project_id - the project id that you wish to create the connection in
* location - the location for the external connection in BigQuery

```

> bq mk --connection --display_name=\'example_connection\' --connection_type=CLOUD_RESOURCE \
>       --project_id=$PROJECT --location=$LOCATION remote_connection

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
bq mk --connection --display_name=\'remote_connection\' --connection_type=CLOUD_RESOURCE \
      --project_id=$PROJECT --location=$LOCATION remote_connection
```

```

### Getting the service account associated with the connection

You need to grant the connection service account to be able to invoke functions.  
To do this, first obtain the service account. 
* location - the location for the external connection in BigQuery
* project - the project where your external connection was created

```
bq show --connection --project_id=$PROJECT --location=$LOCATION remote_connection
```

> Within properties you'll find *serviceAccountId* which will have the service ID you'll need in a subsequent step.

Reviewer 2: This step isn't necessary anymore

### Deploying your Cloud Function

[More information about deploying your cloud function can be found here.](https://cloud.google.com/functions/docs/deploy)

Snippet provided below for brevity.  
It’s recommended that you keep the default authentication instead of allowing unauthenticated invocation of your Cloud Function or Cloud Run service.  
We use gen1 Cloud Functions here for the simple demo purposes; however, gen2 Cloud Functions are recommended. 

* project - the project the cloud function is deployed to 
* runtime - this was defaulted to python39 but can be changed as required 
```
gcloud functions deploy sampleCF \
--project=$PROJECT --runtime=python39 --entry-point=remote_vertex_ai --source=call_nlp --trigger-http
```

### Granting the service account invoker permissions on the functions

Grant the service account obtained above permissions to invoke the functions.
* project - the project where your external connection was created
* cf_name - the name of your cloud function 
* service_account - the service account obtained above

**_NOTE:_** For the below command you will need to have jq installed. 

```

> SERVICE_ACCOUNT=$(bq show --connection --project_id=$PROJECT --location=$LOCATION remote_connection | jq '.cloudResource.serviceAccountId' | tr -d '"')

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
SERVICE_ACCOUNT=$(bq show --connection --project_id=$PROJECT --location=$LOCATION remote_connection | jq '.cloudResource.serviceAccountId' -r)
```

> gcloud --project=$PROJECT functions add-iam-policy-binding sampleCF --member=serviceAccount:$SERVICE_ACCOUNT --role=roles/cloudfunctions.invoker

Reviewer 2: Choose a more meaningful cloud function name (e.g. analyze-sentiment)

Author: updated

```

### Obtaining the full Cloud Function endpoint

[More information about the gcloud functions describe can be found here.](https://cloud.google.com/sdk/gcloud/reference/functions/describe)
* cf_name - the name of the cloud function
```
gcloud functions describe sampleCF
```

You will need the full URL under the httpsTrigger section.
It should look something like this:
```
https://<location>-<project-id>.cloudfunctions.net/<cf-name>

> ```

Reviewer 2: This step is not necessary anymore

Author: removed

### Creating your BigQuery UDF on BigQuery

You can choose to do this many ways.  
* [creating your bq function](/remote_udfs/nlp/create_bq_function.sh) 

The input parameters for the helper script above need to be in order:
* project - the project you deployed to 
* dataset - the BigQuery dataset you want to deploy to 
* location - the location where your BigQuery dataset is
* endpoint - the full endpoint you obtained above

```

> ENDPOINT=$(gcloud functions describe $CF_NAME --format="value(httpsTrigger.url)")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ENDPOINT=$(gcloud functions describe sampleCF --format="value(httpsTrigger.url)")
```

> sh create_bq_function.sh $PROJECT $DATASET $LOCATION $PROJECT.$LOCATION.sampleCF $ENDPOINT

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
sh create_bq_function.sh $PROJECT $DATASET $LOCATION $PROJECT.$LOCATION.remote_connection $ENDPOINT
```

```

### Running it on BigQuery
You should now be able to run the remote UDF on BigQuery.

Try it in your BigQuery console. 
```
select %your_project_id%.%your_dataset_id%.%function_name%("This is really awesome!");
```

It should return a positive float value (as in greater than 0) as a response.

> 

Reviewer 2: Would be good to have a "putting it all together" section at the end where you have all the steps in one script for user to easily run:

```
PROJECT=your_project_id
LOCATION=your_bigquery_dataset_location
DATASET=your_bigquery_dataset_id

bq mk --connection \
    --display_name=remote_connection \
    --connection_type=CLOUD_RESOURCE \
    --project_id="${PROJECT}" \
    --location="${LOCATION}" \
    remote_connection

gcloud functions deploy sampleCF \
    --project="${PROJECT}" \
    --runtime=python39 \
    --entry-point=remote_vertex_ai \
    --source=call_nlp \
    --trigger-http

SERVICE_ACCOUNT=$(bq show --connection --project_id="${PROJECT}" --location="${LOCATION}" remote_connection | jq '.cloudResource.serviceAccountId' -r)
gcloud functions add-iam-policy-binding sampleCF \
    --project="${PROJECT}" \
    --member=serviceAccount:"${SERVICE_ACCOUNT}" \
    --role=roles/cloudfunctions.invoker

ENDPOINT=$(gcloud functions describe sampleCF --format="value(httpsTrigger.url)")
NLP_QUERY="""
CREATE OR REPLACE  FUNCTION \`${PROJECT}.${DATASET}.call_nlp\` (x STRING)
RETURNS STRING
REMOTE WITH CONNECTION \`${PROJECT}.${LOCATION}.remote_connection\`
OPTIONS(
  endpoint = '${ENDPOINT}',
  user_defined_context = [(\"mode\",\"call_nlp\")]
);
"""

bq query \
    --location="$LOCATION" \
    --use_legacy_sql=false \
    "${NLP_QUERY}"

```

# Calling Google's Natural Language API Sentiment Analysis Example 

Google's Natural Language API Sentiment Analysis inspects the given text and identifies the prevailing emotional opinion within the text, especially to determine a writer's attitude as positive, negative, or neutral.  

To run this example, you will need the following APIs enabled:
* [BigQuery API](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs)
* [Cloud Functions API](https://cloud.google.com/functions/docs)
* [BigQuery Connections API](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/working-with-connections#enable_the_connection_service)
* [Natural Language API](https://cloud.google.com/natural-language/docs/setup#api)

## Running the example

### Setting the environment variables 

Replace the various environment variables below with your desired values.  

**_NOTE:_** When setting the LOCATION, use a regional endpoint (for example, us-central1) for the purpose of this demo, the location will be used for both the Cloud Function and the BigQuery parameters.

```
PROJECT=your_project_id

> LOCATION=your_bigquery_dataset_location

Reviewer 2: You're using this location as a region for deploying cloud function, but cloud functions are regional, and if someone selects US as location, then cloud function deployment will fail.

Either add a CLOUD_FUNCTION_REGION var or just deploy cloud function in us-central1

DATASET=your_bigquery_dataaset_id
```

### Navigate to the remote_udfs directory
Change to the remote_udfs directory after cloning the repo. 
```
cd bigquery-utils/udfs/remote_udfs/nlp
```

### Creating your BigQuery connection 

Run the following command to create your BigQuery external connection:

```

> bq mk --connection --display_name=\'remote_connection\' --connection_type=CLOUD_RESOURCE \
>       --project_id=$PROJECT --location=$LOCATION remote_connection

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
bq mk --connection \
    --display_name=\'remote_connection\' \
    --connection_type=CLOUD_RESOURCE \
    --project_id=$PROJECT \
    --location=$LOCATION \
    remote_connection
```

```

### Deploying your Cloud Function

[More information about deploying your cloud function can be found here.](https://cloud.google.com/functions/docs/deploy)

Snippet provided below for brevity.  
It’s recommended that you keep the default authentication instead of allowing unauthenticated invocation of your Cloud Function or Cloud Run service.  
We use gen1 Cloud Functions here for the simple demo purposes; however, gen2 Cloud Functions are recommended. 
Run the following command to deploy your Cloud Function:
```

> gcloud functions deploy analyze-sentiment \
> --project=$PROJECT --runtime=python39 --entry-point=analyze_sentiment --region=$LOCATION --source=call_nlp --trigger-http

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
gcloud functions deploy analyze-sentiment \
    --project=$PROJECT \
    --runtime=python39 \
    --entry-point=analyze_sentiment \
    --region=$LOCATION \
    --source=call_nlp \
    --trigger-http
```

```

### Granting the service account invoker permissions on the functions

**_NOTE:_** For the below commands you will need to have jq installed. 
Run the following commands to grant the service account obtained above permissions to invoke your Cloud Function:

```
SERVICE_ACCOUNT=$(bq show --connection --project_id=$PROJECT --location=$LOCATION --format=json remote_connection | jq '.cloudResource.serviceAccountId' -r)

> gcloud --project=$PROJECT functions add-iam-policy-binding analyze-sentiment --member=serviceAccount:$SERVICE_ACCOUNT --role=roles/cloudfunctions.invoker

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
gcloud functions add-iam-policy-binding analyze-sentiment \
    --project=$PROJECT \
    --member=serviceAccount:$SERVICE_ACCOUNT \
    --role=roles/cloudfunctions.invoker
```

```

### Creating your BigQuery UDF on BigQuery

Run the following DDL statements to create two  remote UDFs in BigQuery, one which analyzes sentiment of plain text and another which analyzes sentiment of html:

```
ENDPOINT=$(gcloud functions describe analyze-sentiment --format="value(httpsTrigger.url)")

ANALYZE_PLAIN_TEXT_UDF_DDL="""
CREATE OR REPLACE  FUNCTION \`${PROJECT}.${DATASET}.analyze_sentiment_plain_text\` (x STRING)
RETURNS STRING
REMOTE WITH CONNECTION \`${PROJECT}.${LOCATION}.remote_connection\`
OPTIONS(
  endpoint = '${ENDPOINT}',
  user_defined_context = [(\"documentType\",\"PLAIN_TEXT\")]

> );

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
);
"""
```

ANALYZE_HTML_UDF_DDL="""

> CREATE OR REPLACE  FUNCTION \`${PROJECT}.${DATASET}.analyze_sentiment_plain_text\` (x STRING)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CREATE OR REPLACE  FUNCTION \`${PROJECT}.${DATASET}.analyze_sentiment_html\` (x STRING)
```

Reviewer 2: This was my fault when copy/pasting

# Calling Google's Natural Language API Sentiment Analysis Example 

Google's Natural Language API Sentiment Analysis inspects the given text and identifies the prevailing emotional opinion within the text, especially to determine a writer's attitude as positive, negative, or neutral.  

To run this example, you will need the following APIs enabled:
* [BigQuery API](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs)
* [Cloud Functions API](https://cloud.google.com/functions/docs)
* [BigQuery Connections API](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/working-with-connections#enable_the_connection_service)
* [Natural Language API](https://cloud.google.com/natural-language/docs/setup#api)

## Running the example

### Setting the environment variables 

Replace the various environment variables below with your desired values.
```
PROJECT=your_project_id
LOCATION=your_bigquery_dataset_location
DATASET=your_bigquery_dataaset_id
```

### Navigate to the remote_udfs directory
Change to the remote_udfs directory after cloning the repo. 
```
cd bigquery-utils/udfs/remote_udfs/nlp
```

### Creating your BigQuery connection 

> To create your BigQuery connection, you need to specify the following:
> * project_id - the project id that you wish to create the connection in
> * location - the location for the external connection in BigQuery

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Run the following command to create your BigQuery external connection:
```

Author: added to mine

```
bq mk --connection --display_name=\'remote_connection\' --connection_type=CLOUD_RESOURCE \
      --project_id=$PROJECT --location=$LOCATION remote_connection
```

### Deploying your Cloud Function

[More information about deploying your cloud function can be found here.](https://cloud.google.com/functions/docs/deploy)

> Snippet provided below for brevity.  
> It’s recommended that you keep the default authentication instead of allowing unauthenticated invocation of your Cloud Function or Cloud Run service.  
> We use gen1 Cloud Functions here for the simple demo purposes; however, gen2 Cloud Functions are recommended.  
> 
> * project - the project the cloud function is deployed to 
> * runtime - this was defaulted to python39 but can be changed as required 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Snippet provided below for brevity.  
It’s recommended that you keep the default authentication instead of allowing unauthenticated invocation of your Cloud Function or Cloud Run service.  
We use gen1 Cloud Functions here for the simple demo purposes; however, gen2 Cloud Functions are recommended. 
Run the following command to deploy your Cloud Function:
```

Author: added to mine

```
gcloud functions deploy analyze-sentiment \
--project=$PROJECT --runtime=python39 --entry-point=analyze_sentiment --source=call_nlp --trigger-http
```

### Granting the service account invoker permissions on the functions

> Grant the service account obtained above permissions to invoke the functions.
> * project - the project where your external connection was created
> * cf_name - the name of your cloud function 
> * service_account - the service account associated with the external connection
> 
> **_NOTE:_** For the below command you will need to have jq installed. 
> 
> You need to grant the connection service account to be able to invoke functions.  
> To do this, first obtain the service account.  
> Then apply the cloudfunctions.invoker role to the service account for the function. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

**_NOTE:_** For the below commands you will need to have jq installed. 

Run the following commands to grant the service account obtained above permissions to invoke your Cloud Function:
```

Author: added to mine

```
SERVICE_ACCOUNT=$(bq show --connection --project_id=$PROJECT --location=$LOCATION --format=json remote_connection | jq '.cloudResource.serviceAccountId' -r)
gcloud --project=$PROJECT functions add-iam-policy-binding analyze-sentiment --member=serviceAccount:$SERVICE_ACCOUNT --role=roles/cloudfunctions.invoker
```

### Creating your BigQuery UDF on BigQuery

You can choose to do this many ways.  
* [Creating your BigQuery function](/udfs/remote_udfs/nlp/create_bq_function.sh) 

The input parameters for the helper script above need to be in order:
* project - the project you deployed to 
* dataset - the BigQuery dataset you want to deploy to 
* location - the location where your BigQuery dataset is
* endpoint - the full endpoint of the cloud function invocation

```
ENDPOINT=$(gcloud functions describe analyze-sentiment --format="value(httpsTrigger.url)")

NLP_QUERY="""

> CREATE OR REPLACE  FUNCTION \`${PROJECT}.${DATASET}.analyze_sentiment_plain_text\` (x STRING)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CREATE OR REPLACE  FUNCTION \`${PROJECT}.${DATASET}.analyze_sentiment\` (x STRING)
```

Reviewer 2: Actually ignore this, I realize you can't change context once it's created

RETURNS STRING
REMOTE WITH CONNECTION \`${PROJECT}.${LOCATION}.remote_connection\`
OPTIONS(
  endpoint = '${ENDPOINT}',
  user_defined_context = [(\"documentType\",\"PLAIN_TEXT\")]
);
"""

bq query \
    --location="${LOCATION}" \
    --use_legacy_sql=false \
    "${NLP_QUERY}"
```

> ### Deploying it all together

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Putting it all together
```

Author: Updated both "deploying" to "putting"

* [Deploying it all together](/udfs/remote_udfs/nlp/deploy.sh)
This script is a cumulation of the various steps.  
This step is optional, only if you haven't done the steps above.  

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [deploy.sh](/udfs/remote_udfs/nlp/deploy.sh) script combines all the previous setup steps into one simple script which you can execute via the following command: 
```

```
PROJECT=your_project_id
LOCATION=your_bigquery_dataset_location
DATASET=your_bigquery_dataaset_id

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> sh deploy.sh $PROJECT $LOCATION $DATASET

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
sh deploy.sh "${PROJECT}" "${LOCATION}" "${DATASET}"
```

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [deploy.sh](/udfs/remote_udfs/nlp/deploy.sh) script combines all the previous setup steps into one simple script which you can execute via the following command:  

```
sh deploy.sh "${PROJECT}" "${LOCATION}" "${DATASET}"
```
```

# Calling Google's Natural Language API Sentiment Analysis Example 

Google's Natural Language API Sentiment Analysis inspects the given text and identifies the prevailing emotional opinion within the text, especially to determine a writer's attitude as positive, negative, or neutral.  

To run this example, you will need the following APIs enabled:
* [BigQuery API](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs)
* [Cloud Functions API](https://cloud.google.com/functions/docs)
* [BigQuery Connections API](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/working-with-connections#enable_the_connection_service)
* [Natural Language API](https://cloud.google.com/natural-language/docs/setup#api)

## Running the example

### Setting the environment variables 

Replace the various environment variables below with your desired values.
```
CONNECTION_NAME=%Functional BigQuery Connection name% 
DISPLAY_NAME=%Friendly or Display BigQuery Connection name%
PROJECT=%Your project name% 
LOCATION=%Your BigQuery dataset location% 
CF_NAME=%Your Cloud Function name%

> DATASET=%Your BigQuery Dataset to deploy to%

Reviewer 2: Since this is an example, you can greatly simplify it by only having users choose:

- LOCATION
- PROJECT
- DATASET

Provide static values for the rest.

> CF_NAME=%Your Cloud Function name%
> ENTRY_POINT=%Your Cloud Function Entry Point%
> DATASET=%Your BigQuery Dataset to deploy to%

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CF_NAME=%Your Cloud Function name%
DATASET=%Your BigQuery Dataset to deploy to%
```

Author: removed from my version

```

### Getting the service account associated with the connection

You need to grant the connection service account to be able to invoke functions.  
To do this, first obtain the service account. 
* location - the location for the external connection in BigQuery
* project - the project where your external connection was created
* connection_name - the name (or friendly/display name) of the external connection

```
bq show --connection --project_id=$PROJECT --location=$LOCATION $CONNECTION_NAME
```

Within properties you'll find *serviceAccountId* which will have the service ID you'll need in a subsequent step.

### Deploying your Cloud Function

[More information about deploying your cloud function can be found here.](https://cloud.google.com/functions/docs/deploy)

Snippet provided below for brevity.  
It’s recommended that you keep the default authentication instead of allowing unauthenticated invocation of your Cloud Function or Cloud Run service.

* cf_name - the name of the cloud function
* project - the project the cloud function is deployed to 
* runtime - this was defaulted to python39 but can be changed as required 
```
gcloud functions deploy $CF_NAME \

> --project=$PROJECT --runtime=python39 --entry-point=$ENTRY_POINT --source=call_nlp --trigger-http

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
--project=$PROJECT --runtime=python39 --entry-point=remote_vertex_ai --source=call_nlp --trigger-http
```

Author: added to my version

```

### Obtaining the full Cloud Function endpoint

[More information about the gcloud functions describe can be found here.](https://cloud.google.com/sdk/gcloud/reference/functions/describe)
* cf_name - the name of the cloud function
```
gcloud functions describe $CF_NAME
```

You will need the full URL under the httpsTrigger section.
It should look something like this:
```
https://<location>-<project-id>.cloudfunctions.net/<cf-name>
```

### Creating your BigQuery UDF on BigQuery

You can choose to do this many ways.  
* [creating your bq function](/remote_udfs/nlp/create_bq_function.sh) 

The input parameters for the helper script above need to be in order:
* project - the project you deployed to 
* dataset - the BigQuery dataset you want to deploy to 
* location - the location where your BigQuery dataset is 
* connection_name - the name of the connection 
* endpoint - the full endpoint you obtained above
* cf_name - the name of the cloud function deployed

```
ENDPOINT=$(gcloud functions describe $CF_NAME --format="value(httpsTrigger.url)")

> sh create_bq_function.sh $PROJECT $DATASET $LOCATION $CONNECTION_NAME $ENDPOINT

Reviewer 2: CONNECTION_NAME needs to be in the following format: 
`project_id.location.connection_name`

[Source](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/reference/standard-sql/remote-functions#create_a_remote_function_2)

Author: good catch, thanks

```

### Running it on BigQuery
You should now be able to run the remote UDF on BigQuery.

Try it in your BigQuery console. 
```

> select function_name("This is really awesome!");

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
select call_nlp("This is really awesome!");
```

Author: updated

# Calling Google's Natural Language API Sentiment Analysis Example 

Google's Natural Language API Sentiment Analysis inspects the given text and identifies the prevailing emotional opinion within the text, especially to determine a writer's attitude as positive, negative, or neutral.  

To run this example, you will need the following APIs enabled:
* [BigQuery API](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs)
* [Cloud Functions API](https://cloud.google.com/functions/docs)
* [BigQuery Connections API](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/working-with-connections#enable_the_connection_service)
* [Natural Language API](https://cloud.google.com/natural-language/docs/setup#api)

## Running the example

### Setting the environment variables 

Replace the various environment variables below with your desired values.  

**_NOTE:_** Your CLOUD_FUNCTION_REGION must match or be within the multi-region of BigQuery REGION. 

```
PROJECT=your_project_id

> REGION=your_bigquery_dataset_region

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
LOCATION=your_bigquery_dataset_location
```

DATASET=your_bigquery_dataaset_id
CLOUD_FUNCTION_REGION=your_cloud_function_region
```

### Navigate to the remote_udfs directory
Change to the remote_udfs directory after cloning the repo. 
```
cd bigquery-utils/udfs/remote_udfs/nlp
```

### Creating your BigQuery connection 

Run the following command to create your BigQuery external connection:

```

> bq mk --connection \
>     --display_name=\'remote_connection\' \
>     --connection_type=CLOUD_RESOURCE \
>     --project_id=$PROJECT \
>     --location=$REGION \
>     remote_connection

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
bq mk --connection \
    --display_name=\'remote_connection\' \
    --connection_type=CLOUD_RESOURCE \
    --project_id="${PROJECT}" \
    --location="${LOCATION}" \
    remote_connection
```

```

### Deploying your Cloud Function

[More information about deploying your cloud function can be found here.](https://cloud.google.com/functions/docs/deploy)

Snippet provided below for brevity.  
It’s recommended that you keep the default authentication instead of allowing unauthenticated invocation of your Cloud Function or Cloud Run service.  
We use gen1 Cloud Functions here for the simple demo purposes; however, gen2 Cloud Functions are recommended. 
Run the following command to deploy your Cloud Function:
```
gcloud functions deploy analyze-sentiment \

>     --project=$PROJECT \
>     --runtime=python39 \
>     --entry-point=analyze_sentiment \
>     --region=$CLOUD_FUNCTION_REGION \

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    --project="${PROJECT}" \
    --runtime=python39 \
    --entry-point=analyze_sentiment \
    --region="${CLOUD_FUNCTION_REGION}" \
```

    --source=call_nlp \
    --trigger-http
```

### Granting the service account invoker permissions on the functions

> **_NOTE:_** For the below commands you will need to have jq installed. 
> Run the following commands to grant the service account obtained above permissions to invoke your Cloud Function:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**_NOTE:_** For the below commands you will need to have jq installed. 

Run the following commands to grant the service account obtained above permissions to invoke your Cloud Function:
```

```

> SERVICE_ACCOUNT=$(bq show --connection --project_id=$PROJECT --location=$REGION --format=json remote_connection | jq '.cloudResource.serviceAccountId' -r)
> gcloud functions add-iam-policy-binding analyze-sentiment \
>     --project=$PROJECT \
>     --member=serviceAccount:$SERVICE_ACCOUNT \
>     --role=roles/cloudfunctions.invoker

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
SERVICE_ACCOUNT=$(bq show --connection --project_id="${PROJECT}" --location="${REGION}" --format=json remote_connection | jq '.cloudResource.serviceAccountId' -r)
gcloud functions add-iam-policy-binding analyze-sentiment \
    --project="${PROJECT}" \
    --member=serviceAccount:"${SERVICE_ACCOUNT}" \
    --role=roles/cloudfunctions.invoker
```

```

> ### Creating your BigQuery UDF on BigQuery

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Creating your BigQuery UDF
```

> You are able to provide different context to the Cloud Function as key value pairs.
> [You can read more about it here.](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/reference/standard-sql/remote-functions#providing_user_defined_context)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You are able to provide different context to the Cloud Function as key value pairs. This example uses context to specify the language of text being passed to the NLP API. 
[You can read more about it here.](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/reference/standard-sql/remote-functions#providing_user_defined_context)
```

Run the following DDL statements to create two remote UDFs in BigQuery, one which analyzes sentiment in English and one in Spanish.

```
ENDPOINT=$(gcloud functions describe analyze-sentiment --format="value(httpsTrigger.url)")

> ANALYZE_en_UDF_DDL="""
> CREATE OR REPLACE  FUNCTION \`${PROJECT}.${DATASET}.analyze_sentiment_en\` (x STRING)
> RETURNS STRING
> REMOTE WITH CONNECTION \`${PROJECT}.${REGION}.remote_connection\`
> OPTIONS(
>   endpoint = '${ENDPOINT}',
>   user_defined_context = [(\"language\",\"en\")]
> );"""
> 
> ANALYZE_es_UDF_DDL="""
> CREATE OR REPLACE  FUNCTION \`${PROJECT}.${DATASET}.analyze_sentiment_es\` (x STRING)
> RETURNS STRING
> REMOTE WITH CONNECTION \`${PROJECT}.${REGION}.remote_connection\`
> OPTIONS(
>   endpoint = '${ENDPOINT}',
>   user_defined_context = [(\"language\",\"es\")]
> );
> """

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ANALYZE_en_UDF_DDL="""
CREATE OR REPLACE  FUNCTION \`${PROJECT}.${DATASET}.analyze_sentiment_en\` (x STRING)
RETURNS STRING
REMOTE WITH CONNECTION \`${PROJECT}.${LOCATION}.remote_connection\`
OPTIONS(
  endpoint = '${ENDPOINT}',
  user_defined_context = [(\"language\",\"en\")]
);"""

ANALYZE_es_UDF_DDL="""
CREATE OR REPLACE  FUNCTION \`${PROJECT}.${DATASET}.analyze_sentiment_es\` (x STRING)
RETURNS STRING
REMOTE WITH CONNECTION \`${PROJECT}.${LOCATION}.remote_connection\`
OPTIONS(
  endpoint = '${ENDPOINT}',
  user_defined_context = [(\"language\",\"es\")]
);
"""
```

> bq query \
>     --location="${REGION}" \
>     --use_legacy_sql=false \
>     "${ANALYZE_en_UDF_DDL}"
>     
> bq query \
>     --location="${REGION}" \
>     --use_legacy_sql=false \
>     "${ANALYZE_es_UDF_DDL}"    

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
bq query \
    --location="${LOCATION}" \
    --use_legacy_sql=false \
    "${ANALYZE_en_UDF_DDL}"
    
bq query \
    --location="${LOCATION}" \
    --use_legacy_sql=false \
    "${ANALYZE_es_UDF_DDL}"    
```

```

### Putting it all together

The [deploy.sh](/udfs/remote_udfs/nlp/deploy.sh) script combines all the previous setup steps into one simple script which you can execute via the following command: 

> **_NOTE:_** Your CLOUD_FUNCTION_REGION must match or be within the multi-region of BigQuery REGION. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [deploy.sh](/udfs/remote_udfs/nlp/deploy.sh) script combines all the previous setup steps into one simple script which you can execute via the following command: 

**_NOTE:_** Your CLOUD_FUNCTION_REGION must match or be within the multi-region of BigQuery REGION. 
```

```
PROJECT=your_project_id

> REGION=your_bigquery_dataset_region

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
LOCATION=your_bigquery_dataset_location
```

DATASET=your_bigquery_dataset_id
CLOUD_FUNCTION_REGION=your_cloud_function_region

> sh deploy.sh "${PROJECT}" "${REGION}" "${DATASET}" "${CLOUD_FUNCTION_REGION}"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
sh deploy.sh "${PROJECT}" "${LOCATION}" "${DATASET}" "${CLOUD_FUNCTION_REGION}"
```

> PROJECT=your_project_id
> LOCATION=your_bigquery_dataset_location
> DATASET=your_bigquery_dataset_id
> CLOUD_FUNCTION_REGION=your_cloud_function_region
> 
> sh deploy.sh "${PROJECT}" "${LOCATION}" "${DATASET}" "${CLOUD_FUNCTION_REGION}"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
sh deploy.sh "${PROJECT}" "${LOCATION}" "${DATASET}" "${CLOUD_FUNCTION_REGION}"
```

Reviewer 2: env variables are already set from beginning of README

```

### Running it on BigQuery
You should now be able to run the remote UDF on BigQuery.

**_NOTE:_** If you get a permissions denied error, wait approximately 60 seconds, permissions may take up to 60 seconds to propagate. 

Try it in your BigQuery console. 
```
SELECT

>     `%your_project_id%.%your_dataset_id%.analyze_sentiment_en`("This is really awesome!") AS english_sentiment

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    `%your_project_id%.%your_dataset_id%.analyze_sentiment_en`("This is really awesome!") AS english_sentiment,
```

> select `%your_project_id%.%your_dataset_id%.analyze_sentiment_en`("This is really awesome!");
> 
> select `%your_project_id%.%your_dataset_id%.analyze_sentiment_es`("esto es realmente impresionante");

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
SELECT
    `%your_project_id%.%your_dataset_id%.analyze_sentiment_en`("This is really awesome!") AS english_sentiment
    `%your_project_id%.%your_dataset_id%.analyze_sentiment_es`("esto es realmente impresionante") AS spanish_sentiment
```

>     `%your_project_id%.%your_dataset_id%.analyze_sentiment_en`("This is really awesome!") AS english_sentiment,
>     `%your_project_id%.%your_dataset_id%.analyze_sentiment_es`("esto es realmente impresionante") AS spanish_sentiment

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    `your_project_id.your_dataset_id.analyze_sentiment_en`("This is really awesome!") AS english_sentiment,
    `your_project_id.your_dataset_id.analyze_sentiment_es`("esto es realmente impresionante") AS spanish_sentiment
```
